Concept - How GenAI and LLMs work (#40316)
dotnet/docs: docs/ai/conceptual/how-genai-and-llms-work.md

---
title: "Concept - How Generative AI and LLMs work"
description: "Understand how Generative AI and large language models (LLMs) work and how they may be useful in your .NET projects."
ms.topic: concept-article
ms.date: 04/04/2024

> #customer intent: As a .NET developer, I want understand how Generative AI and large language models (LLMs) work and how they may be useful in my .NET projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#customer intent: As a .NET developer, I want to understand how Generative AI and large language models (LLMs) work and how they may be useful in my .NET projects.
```

- Modify input audio files based on a set criteria provided in natural language

Audio generation can be used to provide spoken responses from digital voice assistants, add backing instruments to songs for music production, or reproduce a user's original voice from reference recordings if they have experienced some form of speech impairment.

### Code generation

Some generative AI applications can produce code from natural language inputs. Depending on the application and its model(s), users may be able to generate code:

- In the language of their choice
- That accepts a specific input and output structure
- That uses specific technologies based on their reference documentation

Code generation can be used to provide quick implementations of common operations, such as sorting or filtering data, speed up translating code from one language to another, or answer questions about a technology based on specifed reference documentation. For example, a user may input the request, "Show me how to code a game of tic-tac-toe with Python". A generative AI application might produce the following output:

_Sure, here's some basic code for a Tic-Tac-Toe game in Python:_

> ```python

Reviewer 2: I'm assuming this is just a placeholder for the moment, but can we have a C# code sample

Author: I originally used this code sample because it was part of another MS learn module on GenAI, but now I have access to the OpenAI playground on Azure and will create a C# sample with it!

        break  
    elif is_draw():  
        print('The game is a draw!')  
        break  
    player_move('O')  
    if is_victory('O'):  
        print_board()  
        print('O Wins! Congratulations!')  
        break  
    elif is_draw():  
        print('The game is a draw!')  
        break
```

_This is just a basic implementation of the game, and can be improved upon with additional features such as error handling and input validation._

## How do LLMs work?

The latest LLMs are based on the _transformer_ architecture built on techniques that have proven successful in modeling _vocabularies_ to support NLP. Transformer models are trained with large data sets of text; this enables them to recognize semantic relationships between words and use those relationships to determine probable sequences of text that will make sense to a human reader. The larger a transformer model's vocabulary, the more difficult it is to distinguish its output from a human's.

Transformer model architecture consists of two components, or _blocks_:

- An _encoder_ block that creates semantic representations of the training vocabulary
- A _decoder_ block that generates new language sequences

> The specific implementations of this architecture may vary. Some models may only use the encoder block, such as the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model developed by Google to support their search engine. Other models may only use the decoder block, like the Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) model developed by OpenAI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The specific implementations of this architecture may vary. Some models may only use the encoder block, such as the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model developed by Google to support their search engine. Other models may only use the decoder block, like the Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) model developed by OpenAI.
```

The goal is to predict the vector for the next token in the sequence based on the preceding tokens. A weight is assigned to each token in the sequence so far that represents their relative influence on the next token. A calculation is then performed on these weighted vectors that produces an _attention score_ that can be used to calculate a possible vector for the next token.

In practice, a technique called multi-head attention uses different elements of the embedding vectors to calculate multiple attention scores. A neural network is then used to evaluate all possible tokens to determine the most probable token with which to continue the sequence. The process continues iteratively for each token in the sequence, with the output sequence so far being used regressively as the input for the next iteration, building the output one token at a time.

> During training the complete sequence of tokens is know, but all tokens that come after the one currently being considered are ignored. The predicted value for the next token's vector is compared to the actual value and the loss is calculated. The weights are then incrementally adjusted to reduce the loss and improve the model.

Reviewer 3: "know" -> "known"

> During training the complete sequence of tokens is know, but all tokens that come after the one currently being considered are ignored. The predicted value for the next token's vector is compared to the actual value and the loss is calculated. The weights are then incrementally adjusted to reduce the loss and improve the model.

Reviewer 3: Known?

Author: Good catch, thanks!
